docs: the plugin chapter (#1923)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/plugin/what.rst

=================
What is a Plugin?
=================

Before writing your first plugin, you may want to know what is a plugin, how is
it made, and what are the best solutions for your need. In this chapter we'll

> cover what is a Plugin, what you can do with them, and some vocabulary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cover what is a plugin, what you can do with them, and some vocabulary.
```

Or cross-reference to the glossary term `Sopel plugin`?

> You may want to skip ahead to :doc:`anatomy` if you already know what a Plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may want to skip ahead to :doc:`anatomy` if you already know what a plugin
```

I'm going on a crusade against these unnecessarily capitalized words, if you couldn't tell. 😹

Author: Unlike the ones in Human History, this is a rightful one.

is and what types of plugin there are.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

Plugin Types
============

There are four types of plugins: :term:`Single file plugin`,
:term:`Folder plugin`, :term:`Namespace package plugin`, and
:term:`Entry point plugin`.

Single file
-----------

A **Single file** plugin is the most basic form a Sopel plugin can take. It is

> composed of a single file available to Sopel from its plugin's directory (or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
composed of a single file available to Sopel from its ``plugins`` directory (or
```

?

Author: I wanted to say: the directory where Sopel looks for plugins.

Reviewer: Oh, maybe just `plugins` without the backticks/formatting then.

Author: ```suggestion
composed of a single file available to Sopel from its plugins directory (or
```

from one of its
:attr:`extra directories <sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.extra>`). You
should write a single file plugin when:

* everything is in a single file

> * you don't have any dependencies other than Sopel and the Python's built-in
>   library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* you don't have any dependencies other than Sopel and Python's standard library
```

Aside: I don't entirely agree with this—it's perfectly fine to write a single-file plugin with third-party dependencies, in my mind, especially if it's not intended for distribution.

I might add more suggestions about this in the next review round, if you don't vehemently object to explicitly giving users the freedom to skip learning about entry points and packages right away, while they ease into plugin (or Python) development first.

Author: Well it's complicated. Probably worth a conversation.

Reviewer: New alternative suggestion, since we haven't gotten around to having this conversation yet… (sadly)

```suggestion
* you don't have any dependencies other than Sopel and Python's built-in library,
  or your plugin is a "one-off" for your use only (not intended to be shared)
```

I still don't see why we'd mention dependencies for this, but not the `Folder` type.

Author: Oh we totally should @ folder plugins!

Reviewer: Going to do that during rebase before final review?

This type of plugin is easy to install and share: copy its file into the right
location, and Sopel will load it on startup.

Folder
------

A **Folder** plugin is a folder that contains a ``__init__.py`` file. It is

> available to Sopel the same way a :ref:`Single file` plugin is, and share the
> same limitation. Everything that is not available in this ``__init__.py`` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available to Sopel the same way a :ref:`Single file` plugin is, and shares the
same limitation: Everything that is not available in this ``__init__.py`` file
```

won't be visible to Sopel.

By default, Sopel's plugin directories are **not** available in ``sys.path``,
so it is not possible to do ``from my_plugin_dir import some_module`` without
a specific configuration from the bot's owner.

> When a Plugin author wants to split code into different files, and/or share it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a plugin author wants to split code into different files, and/or share it
```

🔠🛡️⚔️

between multiple plugins, the best option is to use an :ref:`Entry point`
plugin instead.

Namespace package
-----------------

A **Namespace package** plugin is a Python :term:`namespace package`, using

> the namespace ``sopel_modules``. It must installed in the Python's environement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the namespace ``sopel_modules``. It must be installed in the Python environment
```

to be used by Sopel, and can require Python dependencies.

Given a ``sopel_modules.plugin`` plugin, Sopel will load everything that is

> available from ``sopel_modules/plugin/__init__.py`` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available from the ``sopel_modules/plugin/__init__.py`` file.
```

It is the initial version of Sopel's packaged plugins: it can be packaged and
uploaded to `PyPI`_ then installed using ``pip install``.

> When a Plugin author wants to distribute a Sopel plugin, the best option is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a plugin author wants to distribute a Sopel plugin, the best option is to
```

🔠🛡️⚔️

> use an :ref:`Entry point` plugin instead.

Reviewer: May be worth mentioning older Sopel version compatibility here and the other places entry-point plugins get recommended, since <7 doesn't support entry points.

Author: I'll add a note in the `Entry point` section, but I'm not fond of adding it to all the other places. After all, this is the last up-to-date version of the documentation, Sopel 7 has been out for a while now, and this won't be published online until 7.1 comes out. Beside, future version of Sopel going forward will support entry points.

So, agree if it was an archive/a history book, disagree with a documentation that moves forward.

Reviewer: Ah, true. I guess we can pretty easily get away with basically telling people, "If this doesn't work, your Sopel is too old and you should update it." 😁

Entry point
-----------

An **Entry point** plugin is a Python module or package distributed via a
``setup.py`` script, and it is available to Sopel via Sopel's ``sopel.plugins``
`setup entry point`__.

Given this definition of an entry point from a ``setup.cfg`` file::

   [options.entry_points]
   sopel.plugins =
       my_plugin = package_name.my_plugin_file

Sopel will load everything available from the ``package_name.my_plugin_file``
Python module under the plugin name ``my_plugin``. It means that you can have
any package name and any module name as long as it is a valid Python module
and as long as you properly define the entry point.

You should write an entry point plugin when:

* you want to distribute your plugin on `PyPI`_
* you want to split the code in multiple files

> * you have dependencies other than Sopel and the Python's built-in library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* you have dependencies beyond Sopel and Python's standard library
```

* you want a modern and reliable way to package your Sopel plugin
* you want to distribute more than one Sopel plugin per distributed package

> An entry point plugin is the best way to package and distribute clean and easy
> to update Sopel plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An entry point plugin is the best way to package and distribute a Sopel plugin
or collection of plugins in a clean and easy-to-update manner.
```

Note that a single Python distributed package can expose more than one Sopel
entry point plugin, which is great to bundle multiple plugins at once.

.. seealso::

   The PyPA specification explains in its `Entry points specification`_ what
   entry points are and how to use them.

.. __: `Entry points specification`_

> Plugin's Name
> =============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Naming plugins
==============
```

=================
What is a Plugin?
=================

Before writing your first plugin, you may want to know what is a plugin, how is

> it made, and what are the best solutions for your need. In this chapter we'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it made, and what are the best solutions for your needs. In this chapter we'll
```

cover what is a plugin, what you can do with them, and some vocabulary.

You may want to skip ahead to :doc:`anatomy` if you already know what a plugin
is and what types of plugin there are.

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

Plugin Types
============

There are four types of plugins: :term:`Single file plugin`,
:term:`Folder plugin`, :term:`Namespace package plugin`, and
:term:`Entry point plugin`.

Single file
-----------

A **Single file** plugin is the most basic form a Sopel plugin can take. It is
composed of a single file available to Sopel from its plugins directory (or
from one of its
:attr:`extra directories <sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.extra>`). You
should write a single file plugin when:

* everything is in a single file
* you don't have any dependencies other than Sopel and the Python's built-in
  library

> This type of plugin is easy to install and share: copy its file into the right
> location, and Sopel will load it on startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of plugin is easy to install: copy its file into the right location,
and Sopel will load it on startup.
```

Goes with my "alternative suggestion" for the above list of reasons to use single-file plugins.

same limitation: Everything that is not available in this ``__init__.py`` file
won't be visible to Sopel.

By default, Sopel's plugin directories are **not** available in ``sys.path``,
so it is not possible to do ``from my_plugin_dir import some_module`` without
a specific configuration from the bot's owner.

When a plugin author wants to split code into different files, and/or share it
between multiple plugins, the best option is to use an :ref:`Entry point`
plugin instead.

Namespace package
-----------------

A **Namespace package** plugin is a Python :term:`namespace package`, using
the namespace ``sopel_modules``. It must be installed in the Python environment
to be used by Sopel, and can require Python dependencies.

Given a ``sopel_modules.plugin`` plugin, Sopel will load everything that is
available from the ``sopel_modules/plugin/__init__.py`` file.

It is the initial version of Sopel's packaged plugins: it can be packaged and
uploaded to `PyPI`_ then installed using ``pip install``.

When a plugin author wants to distribute a Sopel plugin, the best option is to
use an :ref:`Entry point` plugin instead.

Entry point
-----------

> .. versionadded:: 7.0.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. versionadded:: 7.0
```

I can't think of any places we include a `.z` version in these annotations; it's (pretty much?) always `x.y` only.

Author: Oh yeah, why did I do that?

An **Entry point** plugin is a Python module or package distributed via a
``setup.py`` script, and it is available to Sopel via Sopel's ``sopel.plugins``
`setup entry point`__.

Given this definition of an entry point from a ``setup.cfg`` file::

   [options.entry_points]
   sopel.plugins =
       my_plugin = package_name.my_plugin_file

Sopel will load everything available from the ``package_name.my_plugin_file``
Python module under the plugin name ``my_plugin``. It means that you can have
any package name and any module name as long as it is a valid Python module
and as long as you properly define the entry point.

You should write an entry point plugin when:

* you want to distribute your plugin on `PyPI`_
* you want to split the code in multiple files
* you have dependencies beyond Sopel and Python's standard library
* you want a modern and reliable way to package your Sopel plugin
* you want to distribute more than one Sopel plugin per distributed package

> An entry point plugin is the best way to package and distribute a Sopel plugin
> or collection of plugins in a clean and easy-to-update manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An entry point plugin is the best, most flexible way to package and distribute
a Sopel plugin (or collection of plugins) in a clean, easy-to-update manner.
```

Somehow I knew last time that I'd end up revisiting this one. 😹

:term:`Entry point plugin`.

Single file
-----------

A **Single file** plugin is the most basic form a Sopel plugin can take. It is
composed of a single file available to Sopel from its plugins directory (or
from one of its
:attr:`extra directories <sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.extra>`). You
can write a single file plugin when:

* everything is in a single file
* if possible, dependencies should be limited to Sopel and Python's built-in
  library, or your plugin is a "one-off" for your use only (not intended to be
  shared)

This type of plugin is easy to install: copy its file into the right location,
and Sopel will load it on startup.

.. note::

   You can still use a single file plugin with extra dependencies: bot owners
   will have to install them themselves, so you should probably document them,
   and possibly list them in a ``requirements.txt`` file to be used with
   ``pip install -r`` if you want to simplify the installation process.

Folder
------

A **Folder** plugin is a folder that contains a ``__init__.py`` file. It is
available to Sopel the same way a :ref:`Single file` plugin is, and shares the

> same limitation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
same warnings/advice:
```

`setup entry point`__.

Given this definition of an entry point from a ``setup.cfg`` file::

   [options.entry_points]
   sopel.plugins =
       my_plugin = package_name.my_plugin_file

Sopel will load everything available from the ``package_name.my_plugin_file``
Python module under the plugin name ``my_plugin``. It means that you can have
any package name and any module name as long as it is a valid Python module
and as long as you properly define the entry point.

You should write an entry point plugin when:

* you want to distribute your plugin on `PyPI`_
* you want to split the code in multiple files
* you have dependencies beyond Sopel and Python's standard library
* you want a modern and reliable way to package your Sopel plugin
* you want to distribute more than one Sopel plugin per distributed package

An entry point plugin is the best, most flexible way to package and distribute
a Sopel plugin (or collection of plugins) in a clean, easy-to-update manner.

Note that a single Python distributed package can expose more than one Sopel
entry point plugin, which is great to bundle multiple plugins at once.

.. seealso::

>    The PyPA specification explains in its `Entry points specification`_ what
>    entry points are and how to use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The Python Packaging Authority explains how entry points work and how to
   use them in its `Entry points specification`_.
```

I'm mostly avoiding the use of "specification" twice, but expanding the acronym for new Python users who might not know what PyPA is. (Feel free to reject that idea and use the suggestion below instead, which only eliminates the redundant word.)

```suggestion
   The PyPA explains in its `Entry points specification`_ what entry points
   are and how to use them.
```

composed of a single file available to Sopel from its plugins directory (or
from one of its
:attr:`extra directories <sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.extra>`). You
can write a single file plugin when:

* everything is in a single file

> * if possible, dependencies should be limited to Sopel and Python's built-in
>   library, or your plugin is a "one-off" for your use only (not intended to be
>   shared)

Reviewer: Idea: nest the thing

```suggestion
* either:
  * dependencies are limited to Sopel and Python's built-in library; or
  * your plugin is a "one-off" for your use only (not intended to be shared)
```

This type of plugin is easy to install: copy its file into the right location,
and Sopel will load it on startup.

.. note::

>    You can still use a single file plugin with extra dependencies: bot owners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You *can* still use extra dependencies with a single file plugin. Bot owners
```

   will have to install them themselves, so you should probably document them,
   and possibly list them in a ``requirements.txt`` file to be used with
   ``pip install -r`` if you want to simplify the installation process.

Folder
------

A **Folder** plugin is a folder that contains a ``__init__.py`` file. It is
available to Sopel the same way a :ref:`Single file` plugin is, and shares the
same limitation:

* everything that is not available in this ``__init__.py`` file won't be
  visible to Sopel

> * if possible, dependencies should be limited to Sopel and Python's built-in
>   library, or your plugin is a "one-off" for your use only (not intended to be
>   shared)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* either:
  * dependencies should be limited to Sopel and Python's built-in library,
    for ease of installation; or
  * the plugin is a "one-off", not intended to be shared
```

I'm trying really hard to make this better! 😅

between multiple plugins, the best option is to use an :ref:`Entry point`
plugin instead.

.. note::

>    As per the single file plugin, you can still use a folder plugin  with extra
>    dependencies, and you can follow the same advices about ``requirements.txt``
>    and ``pip``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Just like single file plugins, you *can* use extra dependencies with folder
   plugins; the same advice about ``requirements.txt`` and ``pip`` applies.
```
